# Contributing to Datadog Agent

First of all, thanks for contributing!

This document provides some basic guidelines for contributing to this repository.
To propose improvements, feel free to submit a PR.


<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Submitting issues](#submitting-issues)
* [Pull Requests](#pull-requests)
	- [Keep it small, focused](#keep-it-small-focused)
	- [Commit Messages](#commit-messages)
	- [Pull request workflow](#pull-request-workflow)
    + [Before the first PR review](#before-the-first-pr-review)
    + [After the first review](#after-the-first-review)
    + [How to merge to `main`](#how-to-merge-to-main)
	- [Reno](#reno)
		+ [Reno sections](#reno-sections)
* [PR labels](#pr-labels)
* [Integrations](#integrations)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

## Submitting issues

  * If you think you've found an issue, please search the [Agent Troubleshooting][troubleshooting]
    section to see if it's known.
  * If you’re still unsure about the issue, you may reach out to the [Datadog support][support] team with [a flare][flare] from your Agent.
  * Finally, you can open a Github issue.

## Pull Requests

Have you fixed a bug or written a new check and want to share it? Many thanks!

In order to ease/speed up our review, here are some items you can check/improve
when submitting your PR:

<details open>
<summary>Contributor Checklist</summary>

- [ ] Have a proper commit history (we advise you to rebase if needed) with clear commit messages.

- [ ] Write tests for the code you wrote.

- [ ] Preferably make sure that all tests pass locally.

- [ ] Summarize your PR with an explanatory title and a message describing your changes, cross-referencing any related bugs/PRs.

- [ ] Use [Reno](#reno) to create a release note.

- [ ] Open your PR against the `main` branch.

- [ ] Provide adequate QA/testing plan information.
</details>
<br>

<details>
<summary open>Reviewer Checklist</summary>

- [ ] The added code comes with tests.

- [ ] The CI is green, all tests are passing (required or not).

- [ ] All applicable labels are set on the PR (see [PR labels list](#pr-labels)).

- [ ] If applicable, the [config template](https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-agent/blob/main/pkg/config/config_template.yaml) has been updated.
</details>
<br>

> [!NOTE]
> Adding GitHub labels is only possible for contributors with write access.

Your pull request must pass all CI tests before we will merge it. If you're seeing
an error and don't think it's your fault, it may not be! [Join us on Slack][slack]
or [send us an email][email], and together we'll get it sorted out.

### Keep it small, focused

Avoid changing too many things at once. For instance if you're fixing the NTP
check and at the same time shipping a dogstatsd improvement, it makes reviewing
harder and the _time-to-release_ longer.

### Commit Messages

Please don't be this person: `git commit -m "Fixed stuff"`. Take a moment to
write meaningful commit messages.

The commit message should describe the reason for the change and give extra details
that will allow someone later on to understand in 5 seconds the thing you've been
working on for a day.

This includes editing the commit message generated by Github from:

```
Including new features

* Fix linter
* WIP
* Add test for x86
* Fix licenses
* Cleanup headers
```

to:

```
Including new features

This feature does this and that. Some tests are excluded on x86 because of ...
```

If your commit is only shipping documentation changes or example files, and is a
complete no-op for the test suite, please add **[skip ci]** in the commit message
body to skip the build and give that slot to someone else who does need it.

### Pull request workflow

The goals ordered by priority are:
- Make PR reviews (both initial and follow-up reviews) easy for reviewers using
 GitHub
- On the `main` branch, have a meaningful commit history that allows
 understanding (even years later) what each commit does, and why.

You must open the PR when the code is reviewable or you must set the PR as
 draft if you want to share code before it's ready for actual reviews.

#### Before the first PR review

Before the first PR review, meaningful commits are best: logically-encapsulated
 commits help the reviews go quicker and make the job for the reviewer easier.
 Conflicts with `main` can be resolved with a `git rebase origin/main` and a
 force push if it makes future review(s) easier.

#### After the first review

After the first review, to make follow-up reviews easier:
- Avoid force pushes: rewriting the history that was already
 reviewed makes follow-up reviews painful as GitHub loses track of each
 comment. Instead, address reviews with additional commits on the PR branch.
- Resolve merge conflicts with `main` using `git merge origin/main`

#### How to merge to `main`

Once reviews are complete, the merge to `main` should be done with either:
- the squash-merge option, to keep the history of `main` clean (even though
 some context/details are lost in the squash). The commit message for this
 squash should always be edited to concisely describe the commit without
 extraneous “address review comments” text.
- the “rebase-merge” option, after manually rewriting the PR’s commit history
 and force-pushing to the branch. When using this option, the branch must have
 a clean history.

### Reno

We use `Reno` to create our CHANGELOG. Reno is a pretty simple
[tool](https://docs.openstack.org/reno/latest/user/usage.html).

Each PR should include a `releasenotes` file created with `reno`, unless the PR doesn't
have any impact on the behavior of the Agent and therefore shouldn't be mentioned in the
CHANGELOG (examples: repository documentation updates, changes in code comments). PRs that
don't require a release note file will be labeled `changelog/no-changelog` by maintainers.

To install reno: `pip install reno`

Ultra quick `Reno` HOWTO:

```bash
$> reno new <topic-of-my-pr> --edit
[...]
# Remove unused sections and fill the relevant ones.
# Reno will create a new file in releasenotes/notes.
#
# Each section from every release note are combined when the CHANGELOG.rst is
# rendered. So the text needs to be worded so that it does not depend on any
# information only available in another section. This may mean repeating some
# details, but each section must be readable independently of the other.
#
# Each section note must be formatted as reStructuredText.
[...]
```

Then just add and commit the new releasenote (located in `releasenotes/notes/`)
with your PR. If the change is on the `trace-agent` (folders `cmd/trace-agent` or `pkg/trace`)
please prefix the release note with "APM :" and the <topic-of-my-pr> argument with
"apm-".

#### Reno sections

The main thing to keep in mind is that the CHANGELOG is written for the agent's
users and not its developers.

- `features`: describe shortly what your feature does.

  example:
  ```yaml
  features:
    - |
      Introducing the Datadog Process Agent for Windows.
  ```

- `enhancements`: describe enhancements here: new behavior that are too small
  to be considered a new feature.

  example:
  ```yaml
  enhancements:
    - |
      Windows: Add PDH data to flare.
  ```

- `issues`: describe known issues or limitation of the agent.

  example:
  ```yaml
  issues:
    - |
      Kubernetes 1.3 & OpenShift 3.3 are currently not fully supported: docker
      and kubelet integrations work OK, but apiserver communication (event
      collection, `kube_service` tagging) is not implemented
  ```

- `upgrade`: List actions to take or limitations that could arise upon upgrading the Agent. Notes here must include steps that users can follow to 1. know if they're affected and 2. handle the change gracefully on their end.

  example:
  ```yaml
  upgrade:
    - |
      If you run a Nomad agent older than 0.6.0, the `nomad_group`
      tag will be absent until you upgrade your orchestrator.
  ```

- `deprecations`: List deprecation notes here.

  example:
  ```yaml
  deprecations:
  - |
    Changed the attribute name to enable log collection from YAML configuration
    file from "log_enabled" to "logs_enabled", "log_enabled" is still
    supported.
  ```

- `security`: List security fixes, issues, warning or related topics here.

  example:
  ```yaml
  security:
    - |
      The /agent/check-config endpoint has been patched to enforce
      authentication of the caller via a bearer session token.
  ```

- `fixes`: List the fixes done in your PR here. Remember to be clear and give a
  minimum of context so people reading the CHANGELOG understand what the fix is
  about.

  example:
  ```yaml
  fixes:
    - |
      Fix EC2 tags collection when multiple marketplaces are set.
  ```

- `other`: Add here every other information you want in the CHANGELOG that
  don't feat in any other section. This section should rarely be used.

  example:
  ```yaml
  other:
    - |
      Only enable the ``resources`` metadata collector on Linux by default, to match
      Agent 5's behavior.
  ```

## PR labels

For internal PRs (from people in the Datadog organisation), you have few extra
labels that can be use:
- `community/help-wanted`: for community PRs where help is needed to finish it.
- `community`: for community PRs.
- `changelog/no-changelog`: for PRs that don't require a reno releasenote
  (useful for PRs only changing documentation or tests).
- `qa/done`, `qa/no-code-change`: if either the `qa/no-code-change` label or the
  `qa/done` label is set, it will skip the creation of a QA card related to this
  PR during next release process (example: documentation-only PRs).
- `major_change`: to flag the PR as a major change impacting many/all teams
  working on the agent and will require deeper QA (example: when we change the
  Python version shipped in the agent).
- `need-change/operator`, `need-change/helm`: indicate that the configuration needs to be modified in the operator / helm chart as well.
- `k8s/<min-version>`: indicate the lowest Kubernetes version compatible with the PR's feature.

## Integrations

Also called checks, all officially supported Agent integrations live in the
[integrations-core][core] repo. Please look there to submit related issues, PRs,
or review the latest changes. For new integrations, please open a pull request
in the [integrations-extras][extras] repo.


[troubleshooting]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/troubleshooting/
[kb]: https://datadog.zendesk.com/hc/en-us
[support]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/
[flare]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/troubleshooting/send_a_flare/
[extras]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-extras
[core]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core
[slack]: https://chat.datadoghq.com/
[email]: mailto:support@datadoghq.com
